In this paper, we investigate material classification from single
images obtained under unknown viewpoint and illumination.  It is
demonstrated that materials can be classified using the joint
distribution of intensity values over extremely compact neighbourhoods
(starting from as small as 3x3 pixels square), and that this
can outperform classification using filter banks with large support. It
is also shown that the performance of filter banks is inferior to that
of image patches with equivalent neighbourhoods.

We develop novel texton based representations which are suited to
modelling this joint neighbourhood distribution for MRFs.  The
representations are learnt from training images, and then used to
classify novel images (with unknown viewpoint and lighting) into
texture classes. Three such representations are proposed, and their
performance is assessed and compared to that of filter banks.

The power of the method is demonstrated by classifying 2806 images of
all 61 materials present in the Columbia-Utrecht database. The
classification performance surpasses that of recent state of the art
filter bank based classifiers such as Leung and Malik (IJCV 01), Cula
and Dana (IJCV 04), and Varma and Zisserman (IJCV 05). We also
benchmark performance by classifying all the textures present in the
UIUC, Microsoft Textile and the San Francisco outdoor datasets.

We conclude with discussions on why features based on compact
neighbourhoods can correctly discriminate between textures with large
global structure and why the performance of filter banks is not
superior to that of the source image patches from which they were
derived.
